Workflow
===============
This document describes how to creat/edit workflows and workflow steps
and how to setup email notifications based on configurable templates.


Manage workflows / Manage email templates
-----------------------------------------
Under Administration menu go to:
System administration->Plugins->Blocks->Workflows, then you will be on
/blocks/workflow/manage.php page where you can Manage workflows and manage
email templates.

For creating a new workflow, you can press the + (create new workflow)
icon which takes you to /blocks/workflow/editsettings.php where you can fill
the form and press "Save changes" button.

For importing a workflow, you can press the 'Import workflow' icon.

For creating a new email template, press the + (Add email template) icon which
takes you to /blocks/workflow/editemail.php page, then you can set the following
fields "Shortname", "Subject", "Message" and press the "Save chnages" button.

After creating workflows and email templates
Under "Manage workflows" heading you will see a list of workflows and set of icons

'View/Edit workflow' : This allows users to view the workflow sttings, edit the workflow
settings, manage workflow steps as well as clone and export the fokflow.

'Expoet workflow' : This allows users to export current workflow for importing it
 to another intalation of Moodle.

'Clone workflow' : This allows users to clone current workflow including all
workflow steps. Cloning can be a quick way of producing a new workflow which does
similar job.

'Disable workflow'/'Enable workflow': This allows users to disable/enable the current workflow.

'Remove workflow' : This allows users to delete the current workflow if it is not used.


Create new workflow / Edit workflow settings
--------------------------------------------
On /blocks/workflow/editsettings.php page you can set the following fields:
"Shortname"      : The short name of the workflow
"Name"           : The name of the workflow which appears on the workflow block
"Description"    : Describes what the workflow does
"Applies to"     : Whether the workflow applies to a course or an activity (e.g. quiz)
"Current status" : Enabled / Disabled

and press "Save changes" button.


Create/Edit workflow steps
---------------------
On /blocks/workflow/editsettings.php page a newly created workflow contains the 
first step of the workflow with default values which can be changed.
under Workflow steps heading you can Edit the current step or add new steps to
the current workflow.

On /blocks/workflow/editstep.php page you will fill the form with following sections:

Step settings:
"Name"        : The name of the current step.
"Instructions": The instructions about what the current step supposed to do

Step activation:
"On step activation": Set of actions to be completed when making this step active

Step extra notification:
"Notification date": Combination of two select menus
        1) Number of days before/after, e.g.: '5 days before' 
        2) A significant date such as 'the course start date'
"Notify while step is active": Set of actions to be completed while the Notification
date is reached and the current step is still in an active state.

Step completion:
"On Step completion": Set of actions to be completed when this step is completed
the completion could be manually or automatically.
"Automatically finish": Combination of two select menus
        1) Number of days before/after, e.g.: '10 days before' 
        2) A significant date such as 'the course start date'

and press "save changes" button.

There are other section on this page such as:
'Items to complete for this step' : where you can add number of tasks
'Roles responsible for this step' : where you can add or remove roles


Enhancing the workflow system for 'Step extra notify' and 'Step finisher'
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Here wa have the following advantages for enhancing the workflow system:
a. The workflow system is already capable of sending email messages to the
right people based on configurable templates.
b. It will be easy to tell, from the currently active step in the the workflow,
whether the email has been sent or not.
c. To send the email early for any reason (e.g. bank holiday weekend coming up)
an admin can manually go in and finish the step. Similarly, the step can be skipped
if necessary using the Jump feature.
d. This functionality can be useful in other workflows, e.g. doing something
automatically around the time a course start-date. Or if we decided to apply a
workflow to other activities such as wiki, blog, etc, the functionality is
already in place and with a very minor modification can be serving other activities.


Setting up Step extra notification
----------------------------------
Sometime there is a need to notify module teams during production on certain
active step. For instance, 10 days before the course start date.

How does it work
----------------
On the step form on 'Notification date' there are two select menus,

First one with the options:

10 days before
9 days before
.............
1 day before
Same day as (default)
1 day after
...........
9 days after
10 days after

The options of the second select menu depends on the deployment of the workflow.

If the workflow applies to a course, the options are:

Do not send extra notification (default)
the course start date

If the workflow applies to a quiz, the options are:

Do not send extra notification (default)
the quiz open date
the quiz close date

A typical setting might be:
Notification date: '5 days before' 'the course start date'
Notify while step is active: email emailtemplate to manager editigteacher

Obviously the effect is based on the setting of both select nenus.
NB: If the second select menu is set to 'Do not send extra notification',
the first select menu and the field "Notify while step is active" are 
automatically disabled (This is the default which means we do not want to
send extra notification while the curent step is active).

How to setup an step to send extra notification
-----------------------------------------------
Under Side administration -> Plugins ->blocks -> workflows
go to the list of workflows (assuming there is at least one workflow on the list)
and choose a workflow by clicking on the 'view/edit workflow' icon which takes
you to your chosen workflow where you can see the workflow settings and the
workflow steps. click on 'Edit step' icon to modify a step. Expand the
'Step extra notification' heading in the form and set the following fields:
 
"Notification date" : '7 days before' 'the course start date'
"Notify while step is active": 'email emailtemplate to courseteachupdater manager'

and press "Save changes" button


Setting up Step completion to finish the step automatically
-----------------------------------------------------------
Sometime there is a need to finish a workflow step automatically depending on
certain conditions. For instance,
Automatically finish '5 days before' 'the course start date'.

The workflow step finisher functionality finishes the step when condition is
reached and add a comment stating that the current step has been finished
automatically

How does it work
----------------
very similar to 'Step extra notification'
On the step form on 'Automatically finish' there are two select menus,

First one with the options are exactly the same as the options mentioned under
'Setting up Step extra notification'

The options of the second select menu are the same as the options mentioned under
'Setting up Step extra notification' apart from the default value which is set to
'Do not automatically finish'

Obviously the effect is based on the setting of both select nenus.
NB: If the second select menu is set to 'Do not automatically finish',
the first select menu is automatically disabled (This is the default which means
we do not want to finish the current step automatically).

How to setup an step to be finished automatically
-------------------------------------------------
Under Side administration -> Plugins ->blocks -> workflows
go to the list of workflows (assuming there is at least one workflow on the list)
and choose a workflow by clicking on the 'view/edit workflow' icon which takes
you to your chosen workflow where you can see the workflow settings and the
workflow steps. click on 'Edit step' icon to modify a step. Expand the
'Step completion' heading in the form and set the following fields:
 
"Automatically finish" : '7 days before' 'the course start date'

and press "Save changes" button

How does the scheduled tasks and cron work 
------------------------------------------
Two scheduled tasks are set for workflow system.
1) 'Workflow step finisher'     : This deals with finishing steps automatically
2) 'Workflow setp extra notify' : This deals with extra notification functionality.

UNder Administration got to System administration->Server->Scheduled tasks
On /admin/tool/task/scheduledtasks.php page you will see "Workflow steo finisher"
and "Workflow steo extra notify" in the list of tasks.

The tasks are organised in a table form with following headings:
Name, Component, Edit, Last run, Next run, Minute, Hour, Day, Day of week, Month,  Fail delay, Default

Both tasks are set to run every day at 1:01 AM. In other words, you will see that
the Next run for these tasks are set to next day on 1:01 AM or 'ASAP' (if time has
reached and the cron did not run). However, you can edit the scheduled time for
testing purposes.

Whewn the column 'Next run' show 'ASAP', that means the time has reached and
at the next cron job the task will perform the automated task.

1) 'Workflow step finisher' will finish the relevant workflow steps automatically
2) 'Workflow setp extra notify' will send the notification to the users of the specified roles.

How to run the cron
-------------------
On the acceptance or live server, the cron will be running regularly.

On tt-server and other developemnt-servers /admin/cron.php on relevant server
for instance, https://icmatest.vledev2.open.ac.uk/vle/admin/cron.php

NB: When going to the above URL, all cron jobs will be executed depending
on their conditions.


Workflow block
--------------
When a workflow is added to a course or a module, the workflow block displays
the name of the attached workflow as header and some headings and buttons regarding
current workflow step as well as a Workflow overview button.

Block header: Workflow name

"Currently active task" heading: step name

"To be completed by" heading: Text (e.g.: You, or any other, rolename1, rolename2, ... or
rolenameN), Buttoon "Show names(N)" (where N is number of users)

"Show names(N)" button: This button is disabled when N=0 otherwise, triggers a
popup dialogue with the heading:
"People who can do this task" and the following table headings:
'Name , 'Personal Identifier', 'Email address', ..., 'Roles'.
NB: 'Personal Identifier', 'Email address', etc. are taken from the setting page
under "System administration" -> "Users" -> "Permissions" ->  "User policies",
"Show user identity" where the user identity is set. So, the table columns may vary
depending upon this settings.

"Instructions" heading: Instructions about the current step
Comments: comments about the current step

"Edit comments" button: Opens a dialogue box and allow user to edit/make a comment.

"Finish step" button: Opens a dialogue box and allow user to edit/make a comment
and finish the step manually. After finishing current step, the workflow block
will display the information about the next step.

"Workflow overview" button: This button takes the user to the workflow overview page.


"Overview"
---------
This page displays a table with following headings:
Step No, Step name, Roles, Comments, State, Last modified and the last column.
The table headings are self explanatory apart from the last column which does not
have a heading but provides a button in each row. If the step is active, the button
shows "Finish Step", otherwise "Jump to step".
Another button which may appear in the Roles column on each step row after the
role names is "Show names(N)" which is disabled when N=0 otherwise, triggers the
popup dialogue (See above).
